 ---
layout: post
title:  "Neovim setup"
---


# Set up your isolated environment

I could do this with my own set up without having to rely on the .config and .local dirs ; such as neovim-beginner does by alpha2phi

but this gives XDG_DATA_HOME and XDG_CONFIG_HOME different values -- i.e. messing with standard env vars.. 

there must be a better way with nix, to learn later. 

git clone the repo

source ./install.sh 

nvb

```bash
#!/usr/bin/sh
NVIM_BEGINNER=~/.config/nvim-beginner
export NVIM_BEGINNER
rm -rf $NVIM_BEGINNER
mkdir -p $NVIM_BEGINNER/share
mkdir -p $NVIM_BEGINNER/nvim
stow --restow --target=$NVIM_BEGINNER/nvim .
alias nvb='XDG_DATA_HOME=$NVIM_BEGINNER/share XDG_CONFIG_HOME=$NVIM_BEGINNER nvim'
```


use a different folder (~/.config/nvim-beginner) for Neovim configuration. 

If you want to use the default location (:h xdg), 
change NVIM_BEGINNER value to ~/.config.

XDG_CONFIG_HOME is the location to keep the Neovim configuration files.

XDG_DATA_HOME is the location to keep the data, including all our downloaded plugins.


# to learn

Filetype plugin :

:h ftplugin



# Archive

Our folder structure should look like this (:h rtp).

Folder Tree
init.lua
Our init.lua is simple. It invokesplugins.lua under the lua (:h lua-require and :h lua) folder.

require("plugins").setup()
plugins.lua
plugins.lua is where we start to configure Neovim.


plugins.lua
Let’s go through the code.

packer_bootstrap is used to indicate if this is the first time we bootstrap Neovim without any configurations.

By default packer.nvim opens the status window in a vertical split. We specifically configure it to use a floating window.

packer_init is the function to download and install packer.nvim in the XDG_CONFIG_DATA folder.

packadd(:h packadd) is used to load the packer.nvim package immediately after download.

The autocmd for plugins.lua is to compile the file immediately after any changes are saved to generate the compiled loader file (:h packer-commands-compile).

plugins function is where we configure all the plugins. Besides packer.nvim, we install a color scheme, startup screen, and Git.

For first-time installation, packer.nvim shall sync and download all plugins automatically.

Check out this article for other color schemes you can use.

12 Neovim Themes with Tree-sitter Support
Let’s check out some great Neovim themes with tree-sitter support!
alpha2phi.medium.com
autocomplete
snippets
language server provider
which key 
